README.md, before:

# Metal LSP

[![CI](https://github.com/TimPapler/metal-lsp/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/TimPapler/metal-lsp/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Swift](https://img.shields.io/badge/Swift-5.9+-orange.svg)](https://swift.org)
[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/Platform-macOS-lightgrey.svg)](https://www.apple.com/macos/)

A Language Server Protocol (LSP) implementation for Apple's Metal Shading Language, written in Swift.

## Features

- **Real-time Diagnostics**: Validates Metal shaders using the official Metal compiler (`xcrun metal`)
- **Auto-completion**: Comprehensive completion support for:
  - Built-in types (float4, half3, texture2d, etc.)
  - Math functions (sin, cos, normalize, dot, cross, etc.)
  - Geometric functions
  - Texture operations
  - Metal keywords and attributes
  - Function snippets (kernel, vertex, fragment templates)
- **Hover Information**: Rich documentation for built-in Metal functions and types
  - Function signatures with parameter types
  - Detailed descriptions of what each function does
  - Formatted in Markdown for easy reading
- **Neovim Integration**: First-class support for Neovim's built-in LSP client

## Requirements

- macOS (required for Metal compiler)
- Swift 5.9 or later
- Xcode Command Line Tools (for `xcrun metal`)

## Installation

### Build from Source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/metal-lsp.git
cd metal-lsp

# Build the project
swift build -c release

# The binary will be at .build/release/metal-lsp
# Optionally, copy it to a directory in your PATH
cp .build/release/metal-lsp /usr/local/bin/
```

## Neovim Setup

### Using nvim-lspconfig

If you use [nvim-lspconfig](https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig), add this to your Neovim configuration:

```lua
-- ~/.config/nvim/init.lua or ~/.config/nvim/lua/lsp-config.lua

local lspconfig = require('lspconfig')
local configs = require('lspconfig.configs')

-- Define metal-lsp configuration if it doesn't exist
if not configs.metal_lsp then
  configs.metal_lsp = {
    default_config = {
      cmd = { '/path/to/metal-lsp' },  -- Update this path
      filetypes = { 'metal' },
      root_dir = lspconfig.util.root_pattern('.git', 'Package.swift'),
      settings = {},
    },
  }
end

-- Set up the server
lspconfig.metal_lsp.setup({
  on_attach = function(client, bufnr)
    -- Enable completion triggered by <c-x><c-o>
    vim.api.nvim_buf_set_option(bufnr, 'omnifunc', 'v:lua.vim.lsp.omnifunc')

    -- Key mappings
    local bufopts = { noremap=true, silent=true, buffer=bufnr }
    vim.keymap.set('n', 'gd', vim.lsp.buf.definition, bufopts)
    vim.keymap.set('n', 'K', vim.lsp.buf.hover, bufopts)
    vim.keymap.set('n', '<leader>rn', vim.lsp.buf.rename, bufopts)
    vim.keymap.set('n', '<leader>ca', vim.lsp.buf.code_action, bufopts)
    vim.keymap.set('n', 'gr', vim.lsp.buf.references, bufopts)
  end,
})
```

### Manual Setup (without nvim-lspconfig)

```lua
-- ~/.config/nvim/init.lua

vim.api.nvim_create_autocmd('FileType', {
  pattern = 'metal',
  callback = function()
    vim.lsp.start({
      name = 'metal-lsp',
      cmd = { '/path/to/metal-lsp' },  -- Update this path
      root_dir = vim.fs.dirname(vim.fs.find({ '.git', 'Package.swift' }, { upward = true })[1]),
    })
  end,
})
```

### File Type Detection

Add Metal file type detection to your Neovim configuration:

```lua
-- ~/.config/nvim/filetype.lua or add to init.lua
vim.filetype.add({
  extension = {
    metal = 'metal',
  },
})
```

Or using the older method:

```vim
" ~/.config/nvim/ftdetect/metal.vim
autocmd BufRead,BufNewFile *.metal setfiletype metal
```

### Optional: Syntax Highlighting

For basic syntax highlighting, add this to your Neovim configuration:

```lua
-- ~/.config/nvim/after/syntax/metal.lua
vim.cmd([[
  syntax keyword metalKeyword kernel vertex fragment constant device threadgroup thread
  syntax keyword metalKeyword struct enum typedef if else for while do switch case default
  syntax keyword metalKeyword break continue return const constexpr static inline using namespace
  syntax keyword metalType bool char uchar short ushort int uint half float
  syntax keyword metalType bool2 bool3 bool4 int2 int3 int4 uint2 uint3 uint4
  syntax keyword metalType half2 half3 half4 float2 float3 float4
  syntax keyword metalType float2x2 float3x3 float4x4 half2x2 half3x3 half4x4
  syntax keyword metalType texture1d texture2d texture3d texturecube sampler
  syntax keyword metalFunction sin cos tan asin acos atan atan2 pow exp log sqrt
  syntax keyword metalFunction dot cross length distance normalize reflect refract
  syntax keyword metalFunction min max clamp mix step smoothstep abs ceil floor

  highlight link metalKeyword Keyword
  highlight link metalType Type
  highlight link metalFunction Function
]])
```

## Usage

### Command Line Options

```bash
metal-lsp [OPTIONS]

OPTIONS:
  --verbose         Enable verbose logging to stderr
  --log-messages    Log all JSON-RPC messages to stderr
  --version         Show version information
  --help            Show help information
```

### Example Metal Shader

Create a file `shader.metal`:

```metal
#include <metal_stdlib>
using namespace metal;

kernel void computeShader(
    device float* data [[buffer(0)]],
    uint id [[thread_position_in_grid]]
) {
    data[id] = data[id] * 2.0;
}

vertex float4 vertexShader(uint vertexID [[vertex_id]]) {
    return float4(0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0);
}

fragment float4 fragmentShader(float4 position [[position]]) {
    return float4(1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0);
}
```

Open it in Neovim and you'll get:
- Real-time error checking as you save
- Auto-completion when you type (press `Ctrl-x Ctrl-o` or use your completion plugin)
- Hover documentation (press `K` in normal mode over any built-in function or type)
- Diagnostics in the sign column

## Hover Information

Hover over any Metal built-in function or type to see documentation:

- Move your cursor over `normalize`, `float4`, `dot`, etc.
- Press `K` in normal mode (or your configured hover key)
- See formatted documentation with function signatures and descriptions

The LSP includes comprehensive documentation for 136+ Metal built-in functions, types, and keywords compiled directly into the binary. Documentation is extracted from the official Metal Shading Language Specification and provides instant O(1) hash map lookups with zero I/O overhead.

Example: Hovering over `normalize` shows:
```
float2 normalize(float2 x)
---
Returns a vector in the same direction as x but with a length of 1.
```

## Completion Examples

Type these prefixes and trigger completion:

- `float` → suggests `float`, `float2`, `float3`, `float4`, `float2x2`, etc.
- `kernel` → suggests kernel function template snippet
- `[[` → suggests Metal attributes like `[[buffer(0)]]`, `[[vertex_id]]`, etc.
- `norm` → suggests `normalize`
- `text` → suggests texture types like `texture2d`, `texture3d`, etc.

## Development

### Building for Development

```bash
# Build in debug mode
swift build

# Run tests
swift test

# Run the server directly
.build/debug/metal-lsp --verbose
```

### Updating Documentation

The Metal documentation is compiled directly into the binary from Swift code generated from the Metal Shading Language Specification. To regenerate:

```bash
# Regenerate Swift code from spec
make docs-gen
```

This reads `metal-shading-language.md` and generates `Sources/MetalCore/gen/MetalBuiltinData.swift` with ~136 builtin entries. The generated code is committed to the repository for zero-overhead documentation lookups.

### Creating a Release

**Quick Release (Automated):**

```bash
# Bump version, commit, and tag in one command
./scripts/bump-version.sh 0.3.0 --commit

# Push to trigger release
git push && git push --tags
```

**Manual Release (Review First):**

```bash
# 1. Update version
./scripts/bump-version.sh 0.3.0

# 2. Review the change
git diff Sources/MetalCore/Version.swift

# 3. Commit and tag
git add Sources/MetalCore/Version.swift
git commit -m "Bump version to 0.3.0"
git tag v0.3.0

# 4. Push
git push && git push --tags
```

The GitHub Actions CI will automatically:
1. Verify that `Version.swift` matches the tag (fails if mismatch)
2. Build the release binary
3. Create a GitHub release with the binary and installation instructions

**Important:** The version in `Version.swift` must match the git tag. The CI enforces this to prevent version mismatches.

**Obtaining the Metal Shading Language Specification:**

1. Download the official PDF from [Apple's Metal documentation](https://developer.apple.com/metal/Metal-Shading-Language-Specification.pdf)

2. Convert to markdown using marker-pdf:

   ```bash
   # Install marker-pdf
   pip3 install marker-pdf

   # Convert PDF to Markdown (outputs to Metal-Shading-Language-Specification/ directory)
   marker_single Metal-Shading-Language-Specification.pdf --output_format markdown

   # Move/rename the output
   mv Metal-Shading-Language-Specification/Metal-Shading-Language-Specification.md metal-shading-language.md
   ```

### Debugging

To debug the LSP server, you can log messages to stderr:

```bash
metal-lsp --verbose --log-messages 2> /tmp/metal-lsp.log
```

Then in another terminal:

```bash
tail -f /tmp/metal-lsp.log
```

## Troubleshooting

### LSP not starting

1. Verify the binary path in your Neovim config is correct
2. Check that the binary is executable: `chmod +x /path/to/metal-lsp`
3. Run the binary manually to check for errors: `metal-lsp --verbose`

### No diagnostics appearing

1. Ensure you've saved the file (diagnostics run on save)
2. Check that `xcrun metal` works: `xcrun metal --version`
3. Look at the LSP logs: `:lua vim.lsp.set_log_level('debug')` then check `:LspLog`

### Completions not working

1. Verify the LSP is attached: `:LspInfo`
2. Try manual completion: `Ctrl-x Ctrl-o`
3. Check your completion plugin configuration

## Roadmap

Future enhancements:

- [x] Hover information for built-in functions
- [ ] Signature help for functions
- [ ] Document symbols
- [ ] Go to definition (requires parsing)
- [ ] Find references
- [ ] Code formatting
- [ ] Incremental compilation for better performance
- [ ] Context-aware completion (filter by scope)

## License

Apache License 2.0 - See LICENSE file for details

## Acknowledgments

- Built with Swift and the Language Server Protocol
- Uses Apple's Metal compiler for validation
- Inspired by the LSP ecosystem and Neovim's built-in LSP support

Commit message:

Clarify implementation details in README
Added a note about the implementation being vibe coded and its intended use.

README.md, after:

# Metal LSP

[![CI](https://github.com/TimPapler/metal-lsp/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/TimPapler/metal-lsp/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Swift](https://img.shields.io/badge/Swift-5.9+-orange.svg)](https://swift.org)
[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/Platform-macOS-lightgrey.svg)](https://www.apple.com/macos/)

A Language Server Protocol (LSP) implementation for Apple's Metal Shading Language, written in Swift.

### Important: This is an implementation that was vibe coded, with a bit of touches here and there to make it work. It's just a tool to get some basic LSP functionality running in Neovim. I don't intend to support other use case. You can always fork and implement features or fixes you deem necesarry. 

## Features

- **Real-time Diagnostics**: Validates Metal shaders using the official Metal compiler (`xcrun metal`)
- **Auto-completion**: Comprehensive completion support for:
  - Built-in types (float4, half3, texture2d, etc.)
  - Math functions (sin, cos, normalize, dot, cross, etc.)
  - Geometric functions
  - Texture operations
  - Metal keywords and attributes
  - Function snippets (kernel, vertex, fragment templates)
- **Hover Information**: Rich documentation for built-in Metal functions and types
  - Function signatures with parameter types
  - Detailed descriptions of what each function does
  - Formatted in Markdown for easy reading
- **Neovim Integration**: First-class support for Neovim's built-in LSP client

## Requirements

- macOS (required for Metal compiler)
- Swift 5.9 or later
- Xcode Command Line Tools (for `xcrun metal`)

## Installation

### Build from Source

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/metal-lsp.git
cd metal-lsp

# Build the project
swift build -c release

# The binary will be at .build/release/metal-lsp
# Optionally, copy it to a directory in your PATH
cp .build/release/metal-lsp /usr/local/bin/
```

## Neovim Setup

### Using nvim-lspconfig

If you use [nvim-lspconfig](https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig), add this to your Neovim configuration:

```lua
-- ~/.config/nvim/init.lua or ~/.config/nvim/lua/lsp-config.lua

local lspconfig = require('lspconfig')
local configs = require('lspconfig.configs')

-- Define metal-lsp configuration if it doesn't exist
if not configs.metal_lsp then
  configs.metal_lsp = {
    default_config = {
      cmd = { '/path/to/metal-lsp' },  -- Update this path
      filetypes = { 'metal' },
      root_dir = lspconfig.util.root_pattern('.git', 'Package.swift'),
      settings = {},
    },
  }
end

-- Set up the server
lspconfig.metal_lsp.setup({
  on_attach = function(client, bufnr)
    -- Enable completion triggered by <c-x><c-o>
    vim.api.nvim_buf_set_option(bufnr, 'omnifunc', 'v:lua.vim.lsp.omnifunc')

    -- Key mappings
    local bufopts = { noremap=true, silent=true, buffer=bufnr }
    vim.keymap.set('n', 'gd', vim.lsp.buf.definition, bufopts)
    vim.keymap.set('n', 'K', vim.lsp.buf.hover, bufopts)
    vim.keymap.set('n', '<leader>rn', vim.lsp.buf.rename, bufopts)
    vim.keymap.set('n', '<leader>ca', vim.lsp.buf.code_action, bufopts)
    vim.keymap.set('n', 'gr', vim.lsp.buf.references, bufopts)
  end,
})
```

### Manual Setup (without nvim-lspconfig)

```lua
-- ~/.config/nvim/init.lua

vim.api.nvim_create_autocmd('FileType', {
  pattern = 'metal',
  callback = function()
    vim.lsp.start({
      name = 'metal-lsp',
      cmd = { '/path/to/metal-lsp' },  -- Update this path
      root_dir = vim.fs.dirname(vim.fs.find({ '.git', 'Package.swift' }, { upward = true })[1]),
    })
  end,
})
```

### File Type Detection

Add Metal file type detection to your Neovim configuration:

```lua
-- ~/.config/nvim/filetype.lua or add to init.lua
vim.filetype.add({
  extension = {
    metal = 'metal',
  },
})
```

Or using the older method:

```vim
" ~/.config/nvim/ftdetect/metal.vim
autocmd BufRead,BufNewFile *.metal setfiletype metal
```

### Optional: Syntax Highlighting

For basic syntax highlighting, add this to your Neovim configuration:

```lua
-- ~/.config/nvim/after/syntax/metal.lua
vim.cmd([[
  syntax keyword metalKeyword kernel vertex fragment constant device threadgroup thread
  syntax keyword metalKeyword struct enum typedef if else for while do switch case default
  syntax keyword metalKeyword break continue return const constexpr static inline using namespace
  syntax keyword metalType bool char uchar short ushort int uint half float
  syntax keyword metalType bool2 bool3 bool4 int2 int3 int4 uint2 uint3 uint4
  syntax keyword metalType half2 half3 half4 float2 float3 float4
  syntax keyword metalType float2x2 float3x3 float4x4 half2x2 half3x3 half4x4
  syntax keyword metalType texture1d texture2d texture3d texturecube sampler
  syntax keyword metalFunction sin cos tan asin acos atan atan2 pow exp log sqrt
  syntax keyword metalFunction dot cross length distance normalize reflect refract
  syntax keyword metalFunction min max clamp mix step smoothstep abs ceil floor

  highlight link metalKeyword Keyword
  highlight link metalType Type
  highlight link metalFunction Function
]])
```

## Usage

### Command Line Options

```bash
metal-lsp [OPTIONS]

OPTIONS:
  --verbose         Enable verbose logging to stderr
  --log-messages    Log all JSON-RPC messages to stderr
  --version         Show version information
  --help            Show help information
```

### Example Metal Shader

Create a file `shader.metal`:

```metal
#include <metal_stdlib>
using namespace metal;

kernel void computeShader(
    device float* data [[buffer(0)]],
    uint id [[thread_position_in_grid]]
) {
    data[id] = data[id] * 2.0;
}

vertex float4 vertexShader(uint vertexID [[vertex_id]]) {
    return float4(0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0);
}

fragment float4 fragmentShader(float4 position [[position]]) {
    return float4(1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0);
}
```

Open it in Neovim and you'll get:
- Real-time error checking as you save
- Auto-completion when you type (press `Ctrl-x Ctrl-o` or use your completion plugin)
- Hover documentation (press `K` in normal mode over any built-in function or type)
- Diagnostics in the sign column

## Hover Information

Hover over any Metal built-in function or type to see documentation:

- Move your cursor over `normalize`, `float4`, `dot`, etc.
- Press `K` in normal mode (or your configured hover key)
- See formatted documentation with function signatures and descriptions

The LSP includes comprehensive documentation for 136+ Metal built-in functions, types, and keywords compiled directly into the binary. Documentation is extracted from the official Metal Shading Language Specification and provides instant O(1) hash map lookups with zero I/O overhead.

Example: Hovering over `normalize` shows:
```
float2 normalize(float2 x)
---
Returns a vector in the same direction as x but with a length of 1.
```

## Completion Examples

Type these prefixes and trigger completion:

- `float` → suggests `float`, `float2`, `float3`, `float4`, `float2x2`, etc.
- `kernel` → suggests kernel function template snippet
- `[[` → suggests Metal attributes like `[[buffer(0)]]`, `[[vertex_id]]`, etc.
- `norm` → suggests `normalize`
- `text` → suggests texture types like `texture2d`, `texture3d`, etc.

## Development

### Building for Development

```bash
# Build in debug mode
swift build

# Run tests
swift test

# Run the server directly
.build/debug/metal-lsp --verbose
```

### Updating Documentation

The Metal documentation is compiled directly into the binary from Swift code generated from the Metal Shading Language Specification. To regenerate:

```bash
# Regenerate Swift code from spec
make docs-gen
```

This reads `metal-shading-language.md` and generates `Sources/MetalCore/gen/MetalBuiltinData.swift` with ~136 builtin entries. The generated code is committed to the repository for zero-overhead documentation lookups.

### Creating a Release

**Quick Release (Automated):**

```bash
# Bump version, commit, and tag in one command
./scripts/bump-version.sh 0.3.0 --commit

# Push to trigger release
git push && git push --tags
```

**Manual Release (Review First):**

```bash
# 1. Update version
./scripts/bump-version.sh 0.3.0

# 2. Review the change
git diff Sources/MetalCore/Version.swift

# 3. Commit and tag
git add Sources/MetalCore/Version.swift
git commit -m "Bump version to 0.3.0"
git tag v0.3.0

# 4. Push
git push && git push --tags
```

The GitHub Actions CI will automatically:
1. Verify that `Version.swift` matches the tag (fails if mismatch)
2. Build the release binary
3. Create a GitHub release with the binary and installation instructions

**Important:** The version in `Version.swift` must match the git tag. The CI enforces this to prevent version mismatches.

**Obtaining the Metal Shading Language Specification:**

1. Download the official PDF from [Apple's Metal documentation](https://developer.apple.com/metal/Metal-Shading-Language-Specification.pdf)

2. Convert to markdown using marker-pdf:

   ```bash
   # Install marker-pdf
   pip3 install marker-pdf

   # Convert PDF to Markdown (outputs to Metal-Shading-Language-Specification/ directory)
   marker_single Metal-Shading-Language-Specification.pdf --output_format markdown

   # Move/rename the output
   mv Metal-Shading-Language-Specification/Metal-Shading-Language-Specification.md metal-shading-language.md
   ```

### Debugging

To debug the LSP server, you can log messages to stderr:

```bash
metal-lsp --verbose --log-messages 2> /tmp/metal-lsp.log
```

Then in another terminal:

```bash
tail -f /tmp/metal-lsp.log
```

## Troubleshooting

### LSP not starting

1. Verify the binary path in your Neovim config is correct
2. Check that the binary is executable: `chmod +x /path/to/metal-lsp`
3. Run the binary manually to check for errors: `metal-lsp --verbose`

### No diagnostics appearing

1. Ensure you've saved the file (diagnostics run on save)
2. Check that `xcrun metal` works: `xcrun metal --version`
3. Look at the LSP logs: `:lua vim.lsp.set_log_level('debug')` then check `:LspLog`

### Completions not working

1. Verify the LSP is attached: `:LspInfo`
2. Try manual completion: `Ctrl-x Ctrl-o`
3. Check your completion plugin configuration

## Roadmap

Future enhancements:

- [x] Hover information for built-in functions
- [ ] Signature help for functions
- [ ] Document symbols
- [ ] Go to definition (requires parsing)
- [ ] Find references
- [ ] Code formatting
- [ ] Incremental compilation for better performance
- [ ] Context-aware completion (filter by scope)

## License

Apache License 2.0 - See LICENSE file for details

## Acknowledgments

- Built with Swift and the Language Server Protocol
- Uses Apple's Metal compiler for validation
- Inspired by the LSP ecosystem and Neovim's built-in LSP support
